# 4.2 Server certificate validation

This server cannot at this moment test TOFU certificate-pinning.

=> 4.3.gmi Transient client certificate sessions
=> / Home

```
## 4.2 Server certificate validation

Clients can validate TLS connections however they like (including not at
all) but the strongly RECOMMENDED approach is to implement a lightweight
"TOFU" certificate-pinning system which treats self-signed certificates
as first- class citizens.  This greatly reduces TLS overhead on the
network (only one cert needs to be sent, not a whole chain) and lowers
the barrier to entry for setting up a Gemini site (no need to pay a CA
or setup a Let's Encrypt cron job, just make a cert and go).

TOFU stands for "Trust On First Use" and is public-key security model
similar to that used by OpenSSH.  The first time a Gemini client
connects to a server, it accepts whatever certificate it is presented.
That certificate's fingerprint and expiry date are saved in a persistent
database (like the .known_hosts file for SSH), associated with the
server's hostname.  On all subsequent connections to that hostname, the
received certificate's fingerprint is computed and compared to the one
in the database.  If the certificate is not the one previously received,
but the previous certificate's expiry date has not passed, the user is
shown a warning, analogous to the one web browser users are shown when
receiving a certificate without a signature chain leading to a trusted CA.

This model is by no means perfect, but it is not awful and is vastly
superior to just accepting self-signed certificates unconditionally.
```
